---
title: The L64 Coordinate System
---

One day browsing the internet I stumbled upon [what3words][], a website promising to simplify the way we use coordinates.
Instead of using two numbers for latitude and longitude they use 3 words.
They do this by using a grid of 57 trillion 3x3m squares and an proprietary algorithm to map every square to a unique 3 word address.

As much as I like the vision of making coordinates easier to handle, I have a few issues with it:

1. Their convert algorithm is proprietary
2. It has a fixed resolution of 3 meters
3. In order to convert coordinates you need an arbitrary wordlist of at least 40&#8239;000 words
4. Did I already tell you that its algorithm is proprietary and [patented][w3w-patent]?

So I decided to invent my own coordinate system that simplifies coordinates into a single string.
However, instead of using 3 random words I wanted my system to be logical and also easy to implement.
Also I wanted a system where your coordinates could be as accurate as you want.
A system like decimal numbers came to my mind, where adding a digit at the end improves the accuracy of the number.

As I want my coordinates to be a string that is easy to handle nevertheless compact in information I decided to use [Base64][]. (Actually base64url for easier handling.)
In order to use a Base64 string as a location I use an 8x8 grid on top of a map in equirectangular projection (because it is the easiest projection to use with latitude/longitude coordinates).
Every cell in the grid corresponds to a single Base64 character.[^1]

{% include figure src="L64/map.jpg" caption="The L64 grid on a world map. (Source for the map: [Wikimedia](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Equirectangular_projection_SW.jpg))" %}

This is the first letter of the L64 coordinate.
With a single letter you can give a very broad location.
It might not be useful for the most things, but the first letter can distinguish between East Coast (`m`) and West Coast (`j`) or Mediterranean regions (`y`) and northern Europe (`4`).

In order to get more accuracy we scale the grid down by a factor of 8 and put it in one of the cells of the first level grid.
This second level grid tells us the second letter of the L64 coordinate.

If we repeat this scaling and inserting of the grid we can construct a L64 coordinate with as much precision as we need.
However only 8 characters are needed to get an accuracy of about 2m.
With only 2 characters more the accuracy in the order of centimetres.

[^1]: If you wonder why I decided to put the letters in this particular order into their cells: It has technical reasons that make the system easier to use and will be explained in a different post.

[what3words]: http://what3words.com/
[w3w-patent]: https://www.google.com/patents/WO2014170646A1?cl=en
[Base64]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64
